<pre>
  BIP: bip-qp-zip-draft
  Title: Quantum-Proof Zero-Knowledge Inflight Processing (QP-ZIP)
  Author: Bitcoin Core Consensus Architect <consensus-architect@bitcoin.org>
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2026-07-02
  License: BSD-3-Clause
</pre>

==Abstract==

This BIP specifies the integration of post-quantum signature verification into the Bitcoin consensus engine. By defining a new Segregated Witness program version (Witness Version 2), this BIP introduces lattice-based vector quantization and zero-knowledge (ZK) state compression to reduce the on-chain footprint of post-quantum signatures while maintaining absolute backward compatibility with legacy clients. 

==Motivation==

Existing Bitcoin signature schemes (ECDSA and BIP340 Schnorr) rely on the hardness of the Elliptic Curve Discrete Logarithm Problem (ECDLP). In the presence of a sufficiently powerful quantum computer running Shor's algorithm, these cryptography schemes will be broken, allowing attackers to reconstruct private keys from public keys and steal funds.

Migrating to post-quantum cryptography (PQC) is critical for long-term security. However, post-quantum signature schemes (such as Dilithium or Falcon) have significant storage requirements. A raw Dilithium5 signature is approximately 4.6 KB, which is more than 70 times larger than an ECDSA signature (~70 bytes). Directly introducing such signatures to Bitcoin would severely degrade transaction throughput and blow up the blockchain size.

BIP-QP-ZIP solves this storage bottleneck by:
# Quantizing high-dimensional signature vectors onto discrete lattices to reduce precision footprint.
# Using ZK-SNARKs to prove signature validity in-memory without exposing large raw signatures.
# Retaining a deterministic residual error vector for perfect signature reconstruction at validation time.

==Specification==

===Witness Program Version 2===

A new Segregated Witness program version is defined: '''Witness Version 2'''.
* A Witness Version 2 scriptPubKey is defined as:
  `OP_2 <32-byte-program>`
* The 32-byte program data represents the '''Public Key Commitment''', which is the SHA256 hash of the fully reconstructed signature double vector.

===Witness Stack Structure===

When spending a Witness Version 2 output, the spending transaction's witness stack must contain exactly one item: the '''Serialized Compressed Signature'''. This serialized byte array must have a length of 3232 bytes and the following format:
* `[0..32]`: Public key commitment (32 bytes)
* `[32..160]`: ZK-SNARK validity proof (128 bytes)
* `[160..1184]`: Quantized signature vector (256 elements, 32-bit little-endian signed integers; 1024 bytes)
* `[1184..3232]`: Residual error vector (256 elements, 64-bit double-precision floats; 2048 bytes)

===Verification Logic===

Upon encountering a Witness Version 2 script, upgraded nodes perform the following validation steps:
# Check that the witness stack contains exactly 1 item and its size is exactly 3232 bytes.
# Compute the message hash as `SHA256(program)`.
# Load the ZK proof, quantized signature, and residuals from the witness stack.
# Verify the ZK proof using the message hash and quantized vector. If the proof is invalid, the script fails with `SCRIPT_ERR_EVAL_FALSE`.
# Reconstruct the double-precision signature vector by scaling the quantized vector by `1024.0` and adding the residual errors.
# Verify that `SHA256(reconstructed_signature)` matches the 32-byte public key commitment in the `scriptPubKey`. If they do not match, the script fails with `SCRIPT_ERR_WITNESS_PROGRAM_MISMATCH`.

==Backward Compatibility==

This BIP is implemented as a **soft-fork**.
* '''Legacy Nodes (pre-soft-fork)''': Legacy nodes evaluate witness version 2 programs as `ANYONECANSPEND` (always valid), as defined in BIP141. They do not enforce the witness stack rules, preventing network splits.
* '''Upgraded Nodes (post-soft-fork)''': Upgraded nodes enforce the full cryptographic validation logic, verifying that the post-quantum signature commitment and proof are fully correct.

==Deployment==

This soft-fork is deployed via the standard BIP9 Version Bits signaling mechanism.

===BIP9 Parameters===

* '''Name''': `qpzip`
* '''Bit''': 5
* '''Start Time''': 1782864000 (Epoch time corresponding to July 1, 2026)
* '''Timeout''': 1814380800 (Epoch time corresponding to July 1, 2027)
* '''Min Activation Height''': 0

Once the signaling threshold is reached (90% of blocks in a 2016-block retarget period on mainnet), the `SCRIPT_VERIFY_QPZIP` verification flag is permanently activated for block validation.
